---
title:
- Introducing svlint to Nordic
author:
- Dave McEwan
date:
- Thursday 7th September 2023
theme:
- CambridgeUS
colortheme:
- seahorse
---

# Background and Motivation

## What is SystemVerilog?
- SystemVerilog is (arguably) 2 languages.
  - The preprocessor language, vaguely specified in IEEE Std. 1800-2017
    Clause 22 Compiler directives, describes text transformation.
  - The main language, with syntax formally specified (mostly) in Backus-Naur
    Form in IEEE Std. 1800-2017 Annex A, aims to be a unified hardware
    design, specification, and verification.
- Annex A only describes the syntax (valid sequences of text characters),
  not the semantics (what the text actually means); semantics are described
  in the rest of the LRM.
- Anybody working with code can tell you there is better/good code, and there
  is worse/bad code, and everybody's opinion is slightly different.
  - Either can be functionally correct.
  - Sometimes difficult to pin down exactly what makes you classify code as
    better/good on worse/bad.

## What is svlint?
- Command-line tool to analyse SystemVerilog source code.
- Open source SystemVerilog linter, developed on
  [GitHub](https://github.com/dalance/svlint).
  - Initally written by Naoya Hatta at
    [PEZY Computing](https://www.pezy.co.jp/), a Japanese company
    producing supercomputer chips.
  - Many contributions by me, initially as a hobby project, and some as part of
    work in Nordic's DDD team.
  - Several private
    [contributors](https://github.com/dalance/svlint/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md#contributors),
    mostly working at European companies.
- Written in Rust, adhering to modern best-practices in software development.
  - Released versions, SemVer compatibility, easy installation on Linux, MacOS,
    and Windows, testing with continuous integration, etc.
- Contributions welcome!
- No license required.
- Faster than commercial offerings, but be aware of limitations.

## What is a linter?
- Mechanical tool which classifies pieces of code according to a set of precise
  rules.
- There's no avoiding the pinning down of what's good vs bad.
- What is good vs bad depends on who is deciding and context like design vs
  verif.
- Rules can be applied at different levels of analysis.


# Operation

## How svlint works
1. Iterate over source lines, applying text rules to each in turn.
2. Preprocess source then parse into a
   [`SyntaxTree`](https://docs.rs/sv-parser/latest/sv_parser/struct.SyntaxTree.html)
   (Rust data structure).
3. Iterate over nodes of the `SyntaxTree`, applying syntax rules to each
   in turn.

- Uses a preprocessor and parser from a related project
  [sv-parser](https://github.com/dalance/sv-parser) which adhere very
  closely to IEEE Std. 1800-2017 Annex A.
- Each rule operates independently and can maintain state.
- Only violations are reported.
- Rules are pass/fail, i.e. no levels like warning, low, etc.

## Levels of SystemVerilog Analysis
- Text, before the preprocessor.
  - E.g. lines longer than 80 characters, lines with trailing whitespace,
    indented preprocessor directives, etc.
  - Called "text rules" in svlint.
- Syntax, i.e. parsing.
  - E.g. blocking assignment under `always_ff`, identifier that violates naming
    conventions, `if` without matching `else`.
  - Called "syntax rules" in svlint.

------------------ svlint stops here ------------------

- Semantics of a single `description`, i.e. compilation.
  - E.g. variable undeclared before use, constants undefined, etc.
  - Analoguous to compiled object files.
- Semantics of combined `description`s, i.e. elaboration.
  - E.g. unconnected ports, hierarchy too deep, etc.
  - Analoguous to linked executables.

## TOML Configuration 1of2
- A [TOML](https://toml.io/en/) file defines which set of rules are enabled and
  the values of any options they use, i.e. a *ruleset*.
- The file is given by environment variable `SVLINT_CONFIG`.
  - Ideal for large projects distributed across a filesystem.
- Alternatively found by searching up the hierarchy (from the current working
  directory) for a file called `.svlint.toml`.
  - Ideal for small projects contained in one git repository.
- In the
  [MANUAL](https://projecttools.nordicsemi.no/bitbucket/users/damc/repos/dddtools/raw/tools/svlint-v0.9.0/doc/svlint_MANUAL_v0.9.0.pdf?at=refs%2Fheads%2Fmaster),
  syntax rules are (loosely) divided between functional, naming, and
  style/whitespace.

## TOML Configuration 2of2
```toml
# Rules without options.
textrules.style_semicolon = true
syntaxrules.blocking_assignment_in_always_ff = true

# Text rule which uses an option.
# Require all text to fit on a narrow screen.
option.textwidth = 80
textrules.style_textwidth = true

# Syntax rule which uses an option.
# Require output ports to have a prefix.
option.prefix_output = "o_"
syntaxrules.prefix_output = true
```

## Rulesets
- Considering the effects of combining different rules is non-trivial (in terms
  of the code quality that's allowed to pass).
- Some example rulesets are bundled with svlint:
  - `parseonly`: No rules enabled, but syntax must be valid.
  - `style`: Basic set of whitespace checks.
  - `simsynth`: Find obvious risks of simulation/synthesis mismatch.
  - `designintent`: Extends simsynth to require code that means (to a
    simulator/synthesisor) what you (probably) mean.
  - `verifintent`: Like designintent, but for verification code.
  - `DaveMcEwan-*`: My personally preferred configurations.
- You don't need to use these, but you can build from them.
- Yes, I will happily help you get your's (and/or Nordic's) included in future
  releases :)

## Wrapper Scripts
- Typing `SVLINT_CONFIG=.../foo.toml svlint myfile.sv` is cumbersome.
- Instead, all bundled rulesets also have wrapper scripts so you can do
  `svlint-foo` or `svls-foo`.
- If you want additional functionality in a wrapper script, this can be added
  as part of a ruleset definition.


# Live Demonstrations

## Demo: Syntax Checking a Large Collecton of Files
- TODO: Use REST to copy every SIG SystemVerilog file.
- TODO: Rehearse
- Show svlint-parseonly checking all SIG's SystemVerilog.

## Demo: Potential Simulation vs Synthesis Mismatches
- TODO: Create EventsAndIrq workspace.
- TODO: Rehearse
- Show svlint-simsynth results on EventsAndIrq.
- Re-show with `-1`/`--oneline` for compact output.
- Re-show with `--github-actions` for CI compatibility.

## Demo: Vim Integration via `vim-lsp` Plugin
- TODO: Rehearse
- Show configuration in `~/.vimrc`
- Show svlint-simsynth results on EventsAndIrq.


# Getting Started

## Environment Module
Allow the `module` command to find the dddTools.
You might want to add this to `~/.bashrc` (or equivalent).
```sh
module use /pro/sig_research/dddTools/modulefiles
```

Then, make the svlint and svls executables, and their ruleset wrapper scripts,
available for immediate use.
```sh
module load svlint # Latest supported version.
# OR
module load svlint-v0.9.0 # A specific version.
```

## Shell Completion
- Generate shell completion scripts with the `--shell-completion` option.
- Also supports `zsh`, `fish`, `elvish`, and `powershell`.
- Save and source the output to get TAB-completions, e.g:
```sh
svlint --shell-completion=bash \
  > ~/.bash_completion.d/svlint
echo '. "~/.bash_completion.d/svlint"' \
  >> ~/.bashrc
```

## Text-Editor Integration
- Most modern editors support the
  [Language Server Protocol](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Language_Server_Protocol)
  to show diagnostic messages from an external tool.
  - [Vim](https://github.com/prabirshrestha/vim-lsp),
    [Neovim](https://neovim.io/doc/user/lsp.html),
    [Emacs](https://emacs-lsp.github.io/lsp-mode/),
    [VSCode](https://code.visualstudio.com/api/language-extensions/language-server-extension-guide)
- Svls is svlint built as a LSP server.
  - Diagnostic messages, i.e. the hints and reasons you would see running svlint,
    are supported.
  - Other features, e.g. go-to-definition, are not supported.
- Choosing a configuration in VSCode depends on setting the `SVLINT_CONFIG`
  environment variable.

## How to get help/support?
- Read the
  [MANUAL](https://projecttools.nordicsemi.no/bitbucket/users/damc/repos/dddtools/raw/tools/svlint-v0.9.0/doc/svlint_MANUAL_v0.9.0.pdf?at=refs%2Fheads%2Fmaster).
- [Email](<88a4c811.nordicsemi.no@emea.teams.ms) or
  [IM](https://teams.microsoft.com/l/channel/19%3adeciD1M_gigfhFcqzlk50H22BgPuRFkbJOr7A3421_k1%40thread.tacv2/General?groupId=f2fa8309-1e83-4348-8dbe-b266d314a77a&tenantId=28e5afa2-bf6f-419a-8cf6-b31c6e9e5e8d)
  the DDD team.
- Open an [issue](https://github.com/dalance/svlint/issues) (or, ideally a PR)
  on GitHub.


# Extra

## Features for Debugging
- `svlint-parseonly`: The empty ruleset with no rules enabled.
  Useful to quickly check for (in)valid syntax.
- `-E`: Print output from preprocessor.
  Note that every preprocessor is different!
- `--dump-filelist=yaml`: Convert a filelist into YAML.
  Useful for working with other scripts.
- `--dump-filelist=files`: Print list of all files found in a filelist.
  Alternatively, `files` could be `incdirs` or `defines`.
  Useful for checking large filelists.
- `--dump-syntaxtree`: Print your code's syntax tree.
  Useful for working through obscure error messages from other tools.

## Regex Naming Rules Are Powerful
```toml
# Require prefix on function names.
option.re_required_function = "^fu_[a-zA-Z0-9_]+$"
syntaxrules.re_required_function = true

# Forbid any class from being declared.
option.re_forbidden_class = ".*"
syntaxrules.re_forbidden_class = true
```
Not only useful to enforce naming conventions.
Forbidding certain types from being declared means they can't slip through an
early review, such as verif code in design.
